AI_NARRATIVE_TOML_GUIDE.md, before:

# AI Guide to Writing Narrative TOML Files

This guide helps AI assistants (and humans) write correct narrative TOML files by highlighting the most common mistakes and showing correct patterns from working tests.

**Always read `NARRATIVE_TOML_SPEC.md` first** - this guide supplements it with pitfall warnings based on real implementation experience.

---

## CRITICAL ERROR #1: Act Syntax

This is the #1 most common mistake. Get this right or nothing works.

### ❌ COMPLETELY WRONG - Never Use This
```toml
[[acts]]  # NEVER EVER use bare [[acts]]
name = "my_act"
prompt = "Do something"
```

### ✅ CORRECT - Acts Are Named Sections
```toml
[acts.my_act]  # Acts are NAMED SECTIONS with [acts.name]
prompt = "Do something"

[[acts.my_act.input]]  # Inputs are arrays UNDER the named act
type = "text"
content = "Input text"

[[acts.my_act.input]]  # Second input (array element)
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.list"
```

### Key Rules (Read These Three Times)
1. **Acts are named sections**: `[acts.act_name]` (single bracket)
2. **Inputs are array elements** under the act: `[[acts.act_name.input]]` (double bracket)
3. **NEVER EVER** use `[[acts]]` or `[[acts.input]]` directly
4. The act name in `[acts.act_name]` must match what's in `[toc]` order

### Working Example from Real Tests
```toml
[narrative]
name = "test_channels_list"
description = "Test listing guild channels"
skip_content_generation = true

[toc]
order = ["list_channels"]  # Act name referenced here

[acts.list_channels]  # CORRECT: [acts.act_name]

[[acts.list_channels.input]]  # CORRECT: [[acts.act_name.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.list"
required = true

[acts.list_channels.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
```

---

## CRITICAL ERROR #2: Non-Existent Environment Variables

### ❌ WRONG - Inventing Variables That Don't Exist
```toml
[acts.create_channel]
[[acts.create_channel.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.create"

[acts.create_channel.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"    # ✅ This exists in .env
channel_id = "${TEST_CHANNEL_ID}"  # ❌ Does NOT exist!
name = "${CHANNEL_NAME}"           # ❌ Does NOT exist!
```

### ✅ CORRECT - Only Use Real Env Vars OR State Management

**Option 1: Use only environment variables that actually exist**
```toml
[acts.create_channel]
[[acts.create_channel.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.create"

[acts.create_channel.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"  # ✅ Exists in .env
name = "test-channel"          # ✅ Literal value
```

**Option 2: Create resources and cache IDs in state management**
```toml
[toc]
order = ["create_channel", "use_channel"]

# First act: Create channel and cache its ID
[acts.create_channel]
[[acts.create_channel.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.create"

[acts.create_channel.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
name = "test-channel"

[acts.create_channel.input.state]
cache_key = "test_channel_id"  # Save ID for later
extract_field = "id"

# Second act: Use the cached ID
[acts.use_channel]
[[acts.use_channel.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.get"

[acts.use_channel.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
channel_id = "${test_channel_id}"  # ✅ From state management
```

### Environment Variables That Actually Exist
- `${TEST_GUILD_ID}` - ✅ Real, defined in `.env`
- `${DISCORD_TOKEN}` - ✅ Real, defined in `.env`
- `${GEMINI_API_KEY}` - ✅ Real, defined in `.env`

**Everything else must be:**
- A literal value: `"test-channel"`
- Created and cached via state management: `${cached_key_name}`

---

## CRITICAL ERROR #3: State Management Pattern

### The Correct Pattern for Creating and Reusing IDs

```toml
[toc]
order = ["setup", "test", "cleanup"]

# ACT 1: Create resource, cache ID
[acts.setup]
[[acts.setup.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.create"

[acts.setup.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
name = "test-channel"

[acts.setup.input.state]
cache_key = "my_channel_id"  # Choose a descriptive key
extract_field = "id"          # Extract 'id' field from response

# ACT 2: Use cached ID
[acts.test]
[[acts.test.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "messages.send"

[acts.test.input.args]
channel_id = "${my_channel_id}"  # Reference cached ID
content = "Test message"

# ACT 3: Cleanup using same cached ID
[acts.cleanup]
[[acts.cleanup.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.delete"

[acts.cleanup.input.args]
channel_id = "${my_channel_id}"  # Same cached ID
```

---

## Common Working Patterns from Real Tests

### Pattern 1: Simple Read Command
```toml
[narrative]
name = "test_guilds_get"
description = "Test getting guild info"
skip_content_generation = true

[toc]
order = ["get_guild"]

[acts.get_guild]
[[acts.get_guild.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "guilds.get"
required = true

[acts.get_guild.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
```

### Pattern 2: Create-Use-Delete Workflow
```toml
[narrative]
name = "test_channel_lifecycle"
description = "Create, use, and delete a channel"
skip_content_generation = true

[toc]
order = ["create", "send_message", "delete"]

[acts.create]
[[acts.create.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.create"

[acts.create.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
name = "temp-test-channel"
type = "text"

[acts.create.input.state]
cache_key = "temp_channel_id"
extract_field = "id"

[acts.send_message]
[[acts.send_message.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "messages.send"

[acts.send_message.input.args]
channel_id = "${temp_channel_id}"
content = "Test message"

[acts.send_message.input.state]
cache_key = "test_message_id"
extract_field = "id"

[acts.delete]
[[acts.delete.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.delete"

[acts.delete.input.args]
channel_id = "${temp_channel_id}"
```

---

## Checklist Before Writing a Narrative

1. ✅ Am I using `[acts.act_name]` (NOT `[[acts]]`)?
2. ✅ Am I using `[[acts.act_name.input]]` for inputs?
3. ✅ Are my act names in `[toc]` order matching the `[acts.name]` sections?
4. ✅ Am I only using environment variables that exist (`TEST_GUILD_ID`, `DISCORD_TOKEN`)?
5. ✅ If I need an ID that doesn't exist, am I creating it in a setup act and caching it?
6. ✅ Am I using state management with `cache_key` and `extract_field`?
7. ✅ Have I included cleanup/teardown acts to delete created resources?

---

## When In Doubt

**Look at working test examples in:**
- `crates/botticelli_social/tests/narratives/discord/*.toml`
- `crates/botticelli_narrative/narratives/discord/*.toml`

**Copy the structure from a working test** and modify it for your needs. Don't try to invent new syntax.

Commit message:

docs: document environment variable substitution support
- Updated AI_NARRATIVE_TOML_GUIDE with how env var expansion works
- Clarified difference between env vars (static) and state management (dynamic)
- Updated DISCORD_TEARDOWN_ANALYSIS to explain env var vs state usage
- Noted that Botticelli uses shellexpand crate for  syntax

AI_NARRATIVE_TOML_GUIDE.md, after:

# AI Guide to Writing Narrative TOML Files

This guide helps AI assistants (and humans) write correct narrative TOML files by highlighting the most common mistakes and showing correct patterns from working tests.

**Always read `NARRATIVE_TOML_SPEC.md` first** - this guide supplements it with pitfall warnings based on real implementation experience.

---

## CRITICAL ERROR #1: Act Syntax

This is the #1 most common mistake. Get this right or nothing works.

### ❌ COMPLETELY WRONG - Never Use This
```toml
[[acts]]  # NEVER EVER use bare [[acts]]
name = "my_act"
prompt = "Do something"
```

### ✅ CORRECT - Acts Are Named Sections
```toml
[acts.my_act]  # Acts are NAMED SECTIONS with [acts.name]
prompt = "Do something"

[[acts.my_act.input]]  # Inputs are arrays UNDER the named act
type = "text"
content = "Input text"

[[acts.my_act.input]]  # Second input (array element)
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.list"
```

### Key Rules (Read These Three Times)
1. **Acts are named sections**: `[acts.act_name]` (single bracket)
2. **Inputs are array elements** under the act: `[[acts.act_name.input]]` (double bracket)
3. **NEVER EVER** use `[[acts]]` or `[[acts.input]]` directly
4. The act name in `[acts.act_name]` must match what's in `[toc]` order

### Working Example from Real Tests
```toml
[narrative]
name = "test_channels_list"
description = "Test listing guild channels"
skip_content_generation = true

[toc]
order = ["list_channels"]  # Act name referenced here

[acts.list_channels]  # CORRECT: [acts.act_name]

[[acts.list_channels.input]]  # CORRECT: [[acts.act_name.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.list"
required = true

[acts.list_channels.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
```

---

## CRITICAL ERROR #2: Non-Existent Environment Variables

### ❌ WRONG - Inventing Variables That Don't Exist
```toml
[acts.create_channel]
[[acts.create_channel.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.create"

[acts.create_channel.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"    # ✅ This exists in .env
channel_id = "${TEST_CHANNEL_ID}"  # ❌ Does NOT exist!
name = "${CHANNEL_NAME}"           # ❌ Does NOT exist!
```

### ✅ CORRECT - Only Use Real Env Vars OR State Management

**Option 1: Use only environment variables that actually exist**
```toml
[acts.create_channel]
[[acts.create_channel.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.create"

[acts.create_channel.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"  # ✅ Exists in .env
name = "test-channel"          # ✅ Literal value
```

**Option 2: Create resources and cache IDs in state management**
```toml
[toc]
order = ["create_channel", "use_channel"]

# First act: Create channel and cache its ID
[acts.create_channel]
[[acts.create_channel.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.create"

[acts.create_channel.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
name = "test-channel"

[acts.create_channel.input.state]
cache_key = "test_channel_id"  # Save ID for later
extract_field = "id"

# Second act: Use the cached ID
[acts.use_channel]
[[acts.use_channel.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.get"

[acts.use_channel.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
channel_id = "${test_channel_id}"  # ✅ From state management
```

### How Environment Variable Expansion Works

Botticelli automatically expands environment variables in bot command arguments using the `shellexpand` crate:
- Supports `${VAR_NAME}` and `$VAR_NAME` syntax
- Variables are loaded from `.env` file or exported in shell
- Expansion happens at parse time when loading the narrative
- If a variable doesn't exist, the expansion fails silently (keeps original string)

### Environment Variables That Actually Exist
- `${TEST_GUILD_ID}` - ✅ Real, defined in `.env`
- `${DISCORD_TOKEN}` - ✅ Real, defined in `.env`
- `${GEMINI_API_KEY}` - ✅ Real, defined in `.env`

**Everything else must be:**
- A literal value: `"test-channel"`
- Created and cached via state management: `${cached_key_name}` (retrieved from state, NOT env vars)

---

## CRITICAL ERROR #3: State Management Pattern

### The Correct Pattern for Creating and Reusing IDs

```toml
[toc]
order = ["setup", "test", "cleanup"]

# ACT 1: Create resource, cache ID
[acts.setup]
[[acts.setup.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.create"

[acts.setup.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
name = "test-channel"

[acts.setup.input.state]
cache_key = "my_channel_id"  # Choose a descriptive key
extract_field = "id"          # Extract 'id' field from response

# ACT 2: Use cached ID
[acts.test]
[[acts.test.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "messages.send"

[acts.test.input.args]
channel_id = "${my_channel_id}"  # Reference cached ID
content = "Test message"

# ACT 3: Cleanup using same cached ID
[acts.cleanup]
[[acts.cleanup.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.delete"

[acts.cleanup.input.args]
channel_id = "${my_channel_id}"  # Same cached ID
```

---

## Common Working Patterns from Real Tests

### Pattern 1: Simple Read Command
```toml
[narrative]
name = "test_guilds_get"
description = "Test getting guild info"
skip_content_generation = true

[toc]
order = ["get_guild"]

[acts.get_guild]
[[acts.get_guild.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "guilds.get"
required = true

[acts.get_guild.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
```

### Pattern 2: Create-Use-Delete Workflow
```toml
[narrative]
name = "test_channel_lifecycle"
description = "Create, use, and delete a channel"
skip_content_generation = true

[toc]
order = ["create", "send_message", "delete"]

[acts.create]
[[acts.create.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.create"

[acts.create.input.args]
guild_id = "${TEST_GUILD_ID}"
name = "temp-test-channel"
type = "text"

[acts.create.input.state]
cache_key = "temp_channel_id"
extract_field = "id"

[acts.send_message]
[[acts.send_message.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "messages.send"

[acts.send_message.input.args]
channel_id = "${temp_channel_id}"
content = "Test message"

[acts.send_message.input.state]
cache_key = "test_message_id"
extract_field = "id"

[acts.delete]
[[acts.delete.input]]
type = "bot_command"
platform = "discord"
command = "channels.delete"

[acts.delete.input.args]
channel_id = "${temp_channel_id}"
```

---

## Checklist Before Writing a Narrative

1. ✅ Am I using `[acts.act_name]` (NOT `[[acts]]`)?
2. ✅ Am I using `[[acts.act_name.input]]` for inputs?
3. ✅ Are my act names in `[toc]` order matching the `[acts.name]` sections?
4. ✅ Am I only using environment variables that exist (`TEST_GUILD_ID`, `DISCORD_TOKEN`)?
5. ✅ If I need an ID that doesn't exist, am I creating it in a setup act and caching it?
6. ✅ Am I using state management with `cache_key` and `extract_field`?
7. ✅ Have I included cleanup/teardown acts to delete created resources?

---

## When In Doubt

**Look at working test examples in:**
- `crates/botticelli_social/tests/narratives/discord/*.toml`
- `crates/botticelli_narrative/narratives/discord/*.toml`

**Copy the structure from a working test** and modify it for your needs. Don't try to invent new syntax.
